Well, good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us here this morning, last September, during what was a very serious delta wave in Saskatoon when our government introduced a proof of vaccination requirement in a number of workplaces and public venues across the province when we first introduced this policy. I would be the first to admit that I was reluctant to do so. I knew there would be a much benefit from a policy such as this in the fight against COVID and at that time, the the delta wave. But I also knew that that benefit would come with significant cost. I knew that this policy would create deep divisions in our families, in our friendship groups, in our province and in communities across Saskatchewan. But people would potentially have different access or rights based on what their relative vaccination status would be, that is the result of that policy. So what what was actually a pretty extraordinary step to take in this province effectively created two classes of citizens. To my knowledge, this province has never done anything like that before in our history, for any vaccine or for any other reason for that matter. For a time during that delta wave, I do believe that the benefits of this policy, I most certainly did outweigh the costs. There were many more people that went out and got vaccinated, their first dose, their second dose and ultimately, more recently, they're their third or booster dose. And COVID transmission was significantly reduced as we found our way through the delta wave last fall. But today, as we deal with a very different strain, the Omicron variant, the benefits of this policy no longer outweigh the costs. Many, many, many more people today are vaccinated than they were prior to us putting that policy in September the 16th. 85 percent of those that are eligible in this province have received their first dose. 80 percent of those that are eligible have received their second shot and are now fully vaccinated. And nearly 50 percent of those eligible have also went out and received their booster dose. While vaccines are still widely available in Saskatchewan, and they will remain widely available across this province. Lately, vaccine uptake has slowed to some degree, and vaccination, as we know, is not preventing transmission of Armageddon like it did with previous variants. And I will continue to encourage everyone and anyone that is eligible to go out and get vaccinated your first, your second and ultimately your booster dose. As vaccines most certainly do provide significant protection against serious illness from Macron or any other variant. However, if someone makes a different choice about whether or not they are vaccinated, that's their right and this government is going to respect that rate today with Macron. The benefits of the proof of vaccination policy no longer a way the costs. This policy most certainly has run its course. So it's time for us to take a step back and living with COVID and to get to make every effort to get our lives back to normal. It's time for us also to heal the divisions in our communities over vaccination. Those divisions are in our families. They're the yes, they're in our communities, but they are across our province and they're across this nation. It's time for us to come together as families, as friends, as as communities and as a province and as a nation, and it's time for us to reach out and support one another. Let's not judge our neighbor because they may be vaccinated or because they may not be vaccinated. Let's not judge our neighbor if they should choose to wear a mask or not to choose to wear a mask in the weeks ahead. Whenever someone is doing their own personal risk assessment, which we have asked them to do in this province for a period of time now they're doing that assessment for themselves, possibly for their family, and they may come back with a different decision than what you might arrive at. And that different conclusion, albeit maybe different from where you have landed, should not be judged. It should be respected and it should be accepted. It's time for each of us as individuals now to make a conscious effort to treat everyone in our daily lives that we encounter equally. It's also time for the proof of vaccination mandate and so effective at midnight this Sunday, February the 13th, all provincial proof of vaccination requirements will end in Saskatchewan, businesses in venues and provincially regulated workplaces. This means that the proof of vaccination or the negative test option that we provided will no longer be a provincial requirement starting on Valentine's Day, February the 14th. This will be the case. This will leave one remaining COVID measure in place, and that is indoor masking. That measure remains in effect until the end of February. I want to thank all of the businesses and the venues and the workplaces who have shifted course throughout this pandemic to keep their employees and to keep their customers safe. And all of those who implemented and administered the proof of vaccination or proof of negative test policy over the course of the past few months. Thank you for doing your part in your our fight against COVID. And again, I want to thank everyone who made this choice. It is a wise choice to ultimately go out and get vaccinated. You are keeping yourself safe as we move into this next phase, the phase of now living with COVID. I would ask you to continue to make wise choices. This is paramount to our success. Go get your booster dose if you haven't already. Stay home. If you're not feeling well, do a rapid test from time to time. If you do test positive, we want you to stay at home for five days. But let's all in the meantime, also get back to living our lives normally and doing the things that we all love to do. And that's all make that extra effort to be just a little more understanding of others when we may disagree. In fact, this may well be our largest challenge in getting our lives back to normal in our in our families and our communities, in our friendship groups and in our province. We must realize that it's OK for us to disagree. We do hold strong opinions in this province and those are on full display often, but we can disagree without being disagreeable. Don't lose a friend to COVID. You might have to take some time apart, but keep that door open. Time and time again and people have proven that we achieve great things when we come together and when we work together and when we accept those who may have a different opinion than we do. And when we respect others individual decisions, we are poised to lead this nation through COVID. And we are poised to lead the world in an economic recovery in this province. So let's work together. Let's work together to heal some of the divisions. Let's understand that we can forgive our friends, our family members, maybe even ourselves, if that is necessary. Let's work to heal those divisions. Let's come together and let's once again be ourselves in our communities. This is a great province. This is a united province. But most importantly, this is a tolerant province, and we are going to need all of that tolerance in the days ahead. It's time for us to move. Well, we're not removing it today. It'll be removed at midnight. This Sunday were the first province. Yes, to announce that we'll be moving in this direction. I think you will see other provinces providing their citizens with what their plan is on on how as we see cases decline in Saskatchewan and across Canada, as we see hospitalizations decline in Saskatchewan and across Canada. I have no doubt that you will see other provinces putting forward what their plan is on living with COVID and taking steps towards getting life back to normal. That will vary given the the individual cases that individual situations that we see in various regions of Canada. I would put forward that the federal government also should at some point in time, be putting forward what their plan is for the federally regulated industries as well on behalf of Canadians. Not because we should. We should, as Canadians know, you know, where we are going over the course of the next, you know, number of weeks, whether you work in a provincially mandated sectors, which is what we control here today or but also in the federally mandated sectors such as transportation, for example, air travel, things of that nature. And so I think you're going to see other provinces quite likely come forward with, you know what, the next number of weeks look like in their respective jurisdictions. And I think in fairness, you'll probably see the federal government as well in the next while come forward with what it looks like for those those areas of our communities that are regulated under under the federal government. As we know, with all we've been over 20 months, our story with COVID and not on the chronic, but with COVID proper, we've been dealing with this for for close to two years now. You know, should things change in two, three or four months, then ultimately we would. Also, we would have to continue to make the best decisions in, you know, in light of protecting our health care capacity. But for today, where we are with reducing hospitalizations, reducing numbers, we're confident as we move ahead with this phased approach that we are going to take these steps back to normal by reducing and eliminating the public health orders that are in place. But we would also ask Saskatchewan residents to be gracious and to understand that everyone is. Bring their own personal risk assessment, and they might arrive at a different conclusion than you, and we should accept that, and we should respect each and everyone for the decisions that they are making in their environment. So the reason we're able to remove this policies is run its course. It has increased our vaccination rates in the province substantially since it was introduced as we found ourselves in the the delta wave. As we find ourselves in the al-Muqrin wave, which is much more transmissible, the two vaccines do not prevent in any large way the the the transmissibility of COVID. But it most certainly does help when it comes to the severe outcomes of of COVID. So this this policy has run its course and it has enhanced other divisions on whether you are not vaccinated. By seeing if you want to go into, let's say, a restaurant, you're going to need a negative test. If you're if you're not vaccinated. You know, as we move forward, I would view whether or not you're vaccinated against COVID in very much the same scope as to whether or not you get a flu vaccine each and every year. I don't think getting a flu vaccine is in any way a divisive conversation in the province. I often do virtually all the time. I do get a flu vaccine simply because I I see a lot of people, but I don't talk about that like we have with the court, whether or not we have a COVID vaccine. And so I don't view it as a divisive conversation as we move forward. I view it very much in a similar vein as to whether or not you got a flu vaccine, which seldom, if ever, comes up in anyone's conversation. And but that's going to take some effort. That's going to take some individual effort. And I would ask everyone in this province to make that effort, not focus in judge or in any way concern yourself with, you know, who is vaccinated and ultimately who is not vaccinated. Make your own personal risk assessment for you and ultimately your family. And that will be different for different individuals, depending on their age. Whatever goes into that, that decision. And I would ask people to do that, and I would also ask them not to in any way judge anyone else for the fact that post February 28, they may be wearing a mask that's normalized in our society. It should be accepted. And if someone is making that decision, you may not know the reasons as to why they are making that decisions, and I would say that we should respect it. I don't think that there's multiple convoys that are hopping in in, in various areas of the province. And, you know, I think many politicians have spoken to, you know, separating out some individuals comments in each of those convoys from the broader effort, an initiative of people that are attending those convoys to have their voice heard like like any other protest. And I've been clear around instructing and asking all of them to to follow the rules or ultimately face the consequences from law enforcement officials. I think when when you look at influencing the decision that the government is making today, there is influence from people across the province. I would say not specifically convoys, but we have a, you know, a large number of MLAs on the on the Saskatchewan party, on the governing side, and they have been talking to their constituents for while throughout this pandemic. Since the time they have been elected. And between listening and listening very closely in particular to changes in trends and reasoning behind, you know, people's comments to their MLA as well as listening to and we've often talked about the consequences of public health orders, the unintended consequences of public health orders. You know, listening to, you know, families at times very, you know, very impactful stories around some of those consequences. Ultimately, the blend that with the science that we have when you look at the Macron wave being very different than the the delta wave and I said in my opening comments, we were reluctant to bring in a policy like this because it is a divisive policy. It does segregate people in, in our communities and in our society. And when you look at the effectiveness of that, of that policy, it proved to be very effective in finding our way through the delta. We've increased our our vaccination rates markedly here in the in the province. As you look at the challenges with transmissibility, with the al-Muqrin wave and the the case counts that we have, whether they be vaccinated or unvaccinated. This this policy most certainly has run its course. And so it's it's time for us to move to the next the next steps of the next stage of COVID. And that is one that doesn't include a proof of vaccination policy. So to answer your question on on, you know, any convoy of individuals does have an influence as they talk to their respective MLAs, whether or not they're in a convoy, they're still individuals. And we respect that Well, I think, you know, aside from some individuals that have done some really despicable acts and they should be held accountable for those. The bulk of what you're seeing in not all of these protests, but some of them and I would go back a couple of weeks to to the one in Regina. These are just Saskatchewan people that, you know, see the divisions in their family and the friends groups and in their communities, and they're willing to move forward. Living with whatever risk is is is there with COVID, and we're minimizing that by providing the tools for people to use in their personal risk assessment. But they're willing to move forward without the public health orders to to move away from some of the, you know, the divisions that we ultimately are seeing. And so what Saskatchewan is doing today is providing a, you know, a plan how we are going to move away from our public health orders over the course of the next. About three weeks, I suspect you'll see other provinces do something similar in the next while. And I, you know, I would ask the federal government as well on behalf of all Canadians to, you know, continually be revisiting the any of the orders that they have in place as to their effectiveness and and ultimately the the other impacts, the the other consequences that may be evident from from some of those public health orders. I think it's incumbent on all of us as governments to put the public health orders in when they're necessary, and those aren't easy decisions, but we're also incumbent to remove them when they have run their course. And that is what we're seeing here in Saskatchewan. 
